@node Summary of Syntax
@appendix Summary of Syntax

@float 
@multitable @columnfractions .49 0.01 .50
@headitem Syntax @tab @tab What it represents
   @item @smalltalk{startPoint}                 @tab @tab a variable name
   @item @smalltalk{Transcript}                 @tab @tab a global variable name
   @item @smalltalk{self}                       @tab @tab pseudo-variable
   @item @tab @tab
   @item @smalltalk{1}                          @tab @tab decimal integer
   @item @smalltalk{2r101}                      @tab @tab binary integer
   @item @smalltalk{1.5}                        @tab @tab floating point number
   @item @smalltalk{2.4e7}                      @tab @tab exponential notation
   @item @smalltalk{$a}                         @tab @tab the character ‘a’
   @item @smalltalk{'Hello'}                    @tab @tab the string “Hello”
   @item @smalltalk{#Hello}                     @tab @tab the symbol #Hello
   @item @smalltalk{#(1 2 3)}                   @tab @tab a literal array
   @item @smalltalk{@{1. 2. 1 + 2@}}            @tab @tab a dynamic array
   @item @tab @tab
   @item @smalltalk{"a comment"}                @tab @tab a comment
   @item @tab
   @item @smalltalk{|xy|}                       @tab @tab declaration of variables x and y
   @item @smalltalk{x @U{2190} 1}, @smalltalk{x := 1}              @tab @tab assign 1 to x
   @item @smalltalk{[x + y]}                    @tab @tab a block that evaluates to x+y
   @item @smalltalk{<primitive: 1>}             @tab @tab virtual machine primitive or annotation
   @item @tab @tab
   @item @smalltalk{3 factorial}                @tab @tab a unary message
   @item @smalltalk{3+4}                        @tab @tab a binary message
   @item @smalltalk{2 raisedTo: 6 modulo: 10}   @tab @tab a keyword message
   @item @tab @tab
   @item @smalltalk{@U{2191} true}, @smalltalk{^ true}                     @tab @tab return the value true
   @item @smalltalk{Transcript show: 'hello'. Transcript cr} @tab @tab expression separator (.)
   @item @smalltalk{Transcript show: 'hello'; cr} @tab @tab message cascade (;)
   @item @smalltalk{`@{ 3@@4 . 56 . 'click me'@}`}   @tab @tab the compound literal @smalltalk{#(3@@4 56 'click me')}
@end multitable
@end float


@table @strong
 @cindex variable @subentry local
 @item Local variables.

 @smalltalk{startPoint} is a variable name, or identifier. By
 convention, identifiers are composed of words in “camelCase” (i.e.,
 each word except the first starting with an upper case letter). The
 first letter of an instance variable, method or block argument, or
 temporary variable must be lower case. This indicates to the reader
 that the variable has a private scope.

 @cindex variable @subentry shared
 @item Shared variables

 Identifiers that start with upper case letters are global variables,
 class variables, pool dictionaries or class
 names. @smalltalk{Smalltalk} is a global variable, an instance of the
 class @class{SystemDictionary}.

 @cindex receiver
 @item The receiver.

 @smalltalk{self} is a keyword that refers to the object inside which
 the current method is executing. We call it “the receiver” because
 this object will normally have received the message that caused the
 method to execute. self is called a “pseudo-variable” since we cannot
 assign to it.

 @cindex integer (see number)
 @cindex number @subentry integer
 @item Integers.

 In addition to ordinary decimal integers like @smalltalk{42}, @cuis{}
 also provides a radix notation. @smalltalk{2r101} is 101 in radix 2
 (i.e., binary), which is equal to decimal 5.

 @cindex float (see number)
 @cindex number @subentry float
 @item Float point numbers.

 Floating point numbers can be specified with their base-ten exponent:
 @smalltalk{2.4e7} is 2.4 × 10@sup{7}.

 @cindex character
 @item Characters.

 A dollar sign introduces a literal character: @smalltalk{$a} is the
 literal for ‘a’. Instances of non-printing characters can be obtained
 by sending appropriately named messages to the @class{Character}
 class, such as @smalltalk{Character space} and @smalltalk{Character
 tab}.

 @cindex string
 @item Strings.

 Single quotes are used to define a literal string. If you want a
 string with a quote inside, just double the quote, as in
 @smalltalk{'G''day'}.

 @cindex symbol
 @item Symbols.

 Symbols are like Strings, in that they contain a sequence of
 characters.  However, unlike a string, a literal symbol is guaranteed
 to be globally unique. There is only one Symbol object
 @smalltalk{#Hello} but there may be multiple String objects with the
 value @smalltalk{'Hello'}.

 @cindex array @subentry static
 @item Static arrays.

 Static arrays or Compile-time arrays are defined by @smalltalk{#( )},
 surrounding space-separated literals. Everything within the
 parentheses must be a compile-time constant. For example,
 @smalltalk{#(27 #(true false) abc)} is a literal array of three
 elements: the integer @smalltalk{27}, the compile-time array containing the two
 booleans, and the symbol @smalltalk{#abc}.

 @cindex array @subentry dynamic
 @item Dynamic arrays.

 Dynamic arrays or Run-time arrays. Curly braces @{ @} define a
 (dynamic) array at run-time.  Elements are expressions separated by
 periods. So @smalltalk{@{ 1. 2. 1+2 @}} defines an array with
 elements @smalltalk{1}, @smalltalk{2}, and the result of evaluating
 @smalltalk{1+2}. (The curly-brace notation is peculiar to the Squeak
 family dialect of Smalltalk! In other Smalltalks you must build up
 dynamic arrays explicitly.)

 @cindex comment
 @item Comments.

 Comments are enclosed in double quotes. @smalltalk{"hello"} is a
 comment, not a string, and is ignored by the @cuis{}
 compiler. Comments may span multiple lines.

 @cindex variable @subentry local @subentry declaration
 @item Local variable declarations.

 Vertical bars | | enclose the declaration of one or more local
 variables in a method (and also in a block).

 @cindex variable @subentry assignment
 @item Assignment.

 @smalltalk{:=} assigns an object to a variable. Sometimes you will
 see @assign{} used instead. Since this character is not present in the
 keyboard, you key in with the underscore character key. So,
 @smalltalk{x := 1} is the same as @smalltalk{x @U{2190} 1} or
 @smalltalk{x _ 1}.

 @cindex block
 @item Blocks.

 Square brackets @smalltalk{[ ]} define a block, also known as a block
 closure or a lexical closure, which is a first-class object
 representing a function. As we shall see, blocks may take arguments
 and can have local variables.

 @cindex primitive
 @item Primitives.

 @smalltalk{<primitive: ...>} denotes an invocation of a virtual
 machine primitive. (@smalltalk{<primitive: 1>} is the VM primitive
 for @smalltalk{SmallInteger>>+}.) Any code following the primitive is
 executed only if the primitive fails. The same syntax is also used
 for method annotations.

 @cindex message @subentry unary
 @item Unary messages.

 Unary messages consist of a single word (like @msg{factorial})
 sent to a receiver (like 3).

 @cindex message @subentry binary
 @item Binary messages.

 Binary messages are operators (like @smalltalk{+}) sent to a receiver
 and taking a single argument. In @smalltalk{3 + 4}, the receiver is
 @smalltalk{3} and the argument is @smalltalk{4}.

 @cindex message @subentry keyword
 @item Keyword messages.

 Keyword messages consist of multiple keywords (like
 @msg{raisedTo:modulo:}), each ending with a colon and taking a single
 argument. In the expression @smalltalk{2 raisedTo: 6 modulo: 10}, the
 message selector @smalltalk{raisedTo:modulo:} takes the two arguments
 6 and 10, one following each colon. We send the message to the
 receiver 2.

 @cindex returned value
 @item Method return.

 @U{2191} is used to return a value from a method. (You must type ^ to obtain
 the @U{2191} character.)

 @cindex sequence
 @item Sequences of statements.

 A period or full-stop (.) is the statement separator.  Putting a
 period between two expressions turns them into independent
 statements.

 @cindex cascade of messages
 @item Cascades.

 Semicolons can be used to send a cascade of messages to a single
 receiver. In @smalltalk{Transcript show: 'hello'; cr} we first send
 the keyword message @msg{show: 'hello'} to the receiver
 @class{Transcript}, and then we send the unary message @msg{cr} to
 the same receiver.

 @item Compound Literal

 Backticks (@smalltalk{`}) can be used to create compound literals at compile time.
 All components of a compound literal must be known when the code is compiled.

@end table
