\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@set timeStamp Time-stamp: <2021-01-30 19:59:38 hilaire>
@include ../bookSettings.texinfo
@c %**end of header

@copying
This book is for @cuis{} (@value{cuisVersion}), a free and modern
implementation of the Smalltalk language and environment.

Copyright @copyright{} 2020 @writers{}
@*
@thanks{}
@*

@*
Compilation : @today{}

Documentation source: @url{https://github.com/Cuis-Smalltalk/TheCuisBook} 

@*
The contents of this book are protected under Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International.

@i{You are free to:}
@*
@b{Share} -- copy and redistribute the material in any medium or
format
@*
@b{Adapt} -- remix, transform, and build upon the material for any
purpose, even commercially.

@*
@i{Under the following terms:}
@*
@b{Attribution.} You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to
the license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any
reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor
endorses you or your use.
@*
@b{Share Alike.} If you remix, transform, or build upon the material,
you must distribute your contributions under the same license as the
original.

Complete license: @url{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode}

@end copying

@titlepage
@title The @cuis{} book
@subtitle Work-In-Progress
@author @writers{}

@iftex
   @page
   @vskip 0pt plus 1filll
   @insertcopying
@end iftex
@end titlepage

@iftex
@shortcontents
@contents
@end iftex

@node Top

@ifnottex
@quotation
I like it... It's nice and clean and simple and pretty. Nice stuff!
@author Alan Kay
@end quotation

Cuis is a free Smalltalk-80 environment with a specific set of goals:
being simple and powerful. It is also portable to any platform, fast
and efficient.
@*

You are reading the Cuis Book!

@top Table of Contents
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Preface::
* Beginnings::
* The Message Way of Life::
* Class - Model of Communicating Entities::
* The Collection Way of Life::
* Control Flow Messaging::
* Visual with Morph::
* The Fundamentals of Morph::
* Events::
* Code Management::
* Debug and Exception Handling::
* Sharing Cuis::
* Documents Copyright::
* Summary of Syntax::
* The Exercises::
* Solutions of the Exercises::
* The Examples::
* The Figures::
* Indexes::
@end menu

@ifnottex
 @insertcopying
@end ifnottex 

@tex
\global\parskip=0.5em
@end tex

@c================================================================
@c Preface
@include chapter-00/contents.texinfo
@c================================================================
@c:Part One
@c @part Part One @*The basis of @cuis{}
@c
@include chapter-01/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-02/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-03/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-04/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-05/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-06/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-07/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-08/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-09/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-10/contents.texinfo
@c
@include chapter-11/contents.texinfo
@c================================================================
@c: Part Four
@c @part Part Four @*Appendices
@c Copyrighted document used in the book
@include copyrights.texinfo
@c Summary of syntax
@include syntaxSummary.texinfo
@c List of exercises
@node The Exercises
@appendix The Exercises
@listoffloats Exercise
@c Solutions of exercises
@include chapter-50/contents.texinfo
@c List of examples
@node The Examples
@appendix The Examples
@listoffloats Example
@c List of figures
@node The Figures
@appendix The Figures
@listoffloats Figure
@c Indexes
@node Indexes
@appendix Conceptual index
@printindex cp
@c================================================================
@c: To be filled



@c:END OF THE BOOK
@bye
