@node Beginnings
@chapter Beginnings

@quotation
The computer is simply an instrument whose music is ideas.
@author Alan Kay
@end quotation

@* @* @* @*

Before getting into the details of how to use the @cuis{} language and
tools to build software, we need to understand the point of view,
assumptions and intentions that shape how @cuis{} is meant to be
used. We can call this the Smalltalk philosophy of programming.

@menu
* Historical Context::
* Installing and configuring @cuis{}::
* Writing your first scripts::
* Spacewar!::
@end menu

@node Historical Context
@section Historical Context

One major idea in software is that programming is merely giving a
computer a set of instructions to solve some problem.  In this point
of view, the only value of software is to achieve a result, and therefore, a piece
of software is only as interesting as having that problem solved.
Furthermore, as programming is not interesting by itself, it
is left to a professional guild with a specialized technical knowledge of how to
write software, and the rest of the world just ignores it.

Our focus is on one thread in the history of powerful ideas which give
a different lens through which to explore software development.
The historical development of these ideas differs from 
the @emph{just solve a problem} view. We think this is worth
revisiting. 

The first clear vision of an automated information processor to augment
our collective memory, to find and share knowledge -- indeed to transform the 
data explosion into an information explosion, and then into a knowledge and 
understanding explosion -- was called Memex and described in the Vannevar Bush 
essay ``As We May Think'' in 1945
@footnote{@url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/As_We_May_Think}}.
Bush's description of the possibility of developing a Memex processing system
to help individuals access, evolve and capture knowledge 
for our collective benefit
inspired many later thinkers and inventors in the development
of personal computers, networks, hypertext, search engines, and
knowledge repositories such as Wikipedia
@footnote{Notable early milestones in this line of
development were Ivan Sutherland's Sketchpad (1963), the RAND tablet
(1964), and Doug Engelbart's NLS ("oN-Line System") (1968). Later
developments include Ted Nelson's Xanadu, the Apple Macintosh, the
World Wide Web, smartphones and tablet computers.}.

As computational machinery evolved from large, single program at a time mainframes,
into timesharing mainframes, and into minicomputers, another area of 
insight was developing with models of how humans learn 
@footnote{Early notables
here are J. Piaget, J. Brunner, O. K. Moore, and S. Papert.}.
People began to talk of @dfn{human-computer symbiosis}.
Alan Kay
conceived the idea that computer software and computer programming
could become a new medium for expressing thoughts and knowledge. The
ability to express ideas in this new medium would be the new
literacy. Every person should learn to read and write in this new
digital medium, and would have available their own dynamic book, a @dfn{Dynabook}
@footnote{``A personal computer for children of all ages''(1972) @url{http://www.vpri.org/pdf/hc_pers_comp_for_children.pdf}}
@footnote{``Personal Dynamic Media''(1977) @url{http://www.vpri.org/pdf/m1977001_dynamedia.pdf}}
to accomplish this.

Very readable accounts of historic developments are Alan Kay's papers
``The Early History of Smalltalk'' @footnote{@url{http://worrydream.com/EarlyHistoryOfSmalltalk}} and 
``What is a Dynabook?'' @footnote{@url{http://www.vpri.org/pdf/hc_what_Is_a_dynabook.pdf}}
in which he notes @emph{The best way to predict the future is to invent it}.
Realizing the Dynabook vision required significant advances and
mutually supporting development of
hardware and software. The original development took place at the
Xerox PARC research center in the 1970's. The first @emph{interim
Dynabook} hardware was the Xerox Alto, generally considered the first
personal computer. The software system was Smalltalk. The design of both
was guided by the objectives of making @emph{Personal Dynamic Media}
and the Dynabook real. The final version of Smalltalk built at Xerox
was Smalltalk-80.

Given the relatively weak capabilities of computer hardware at that
time, implementing this vision presented real challenges, and much
creativity was called for.  Today, smartphones, tablets and laptops do
have the hardware capabilities a Dynabook requires. However, the same
advance hasn't happened for the medium of personal software. 

In 1981 Dan Ingalls, one of the early Smalltalk inventors, wrote in his
article ``Design Principles Behind Smalltalk''
@footnote{@url{http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~evans/cs655/readings/smalltalk.html}}
a number of principles that still guide us today. Among these:
@quotation
@strong{Personal Mastery.} If a system is to serve the creative
spirit, it must be entirely comprehensible to a single individual.

@strong{Reactive Principle.} Every component accessible to the user
should be able to present itself in a meaningful way for observation
and manipulation.
@end quotation

With the commercialization of software, the trend has been to give people
``shrink wrapped'' applications which are sealed off and written
by professional software developers. One may customize an
application by changing ``user settings'', but there is no way
to see into or change deep capabilities.

In keeping with the ideal of personal media literacy,
we believe that everyone should have full access to the software that
runs our systems.  Understanding and exploring computer systems
requires writing software in ways that can be read and shared.

The thinking change in problem solving can shift from @emph{What can I
do here with what I am presented?} to asking @emph{What tools do I
need to be successful here?} and then building them to be ever more
successful.

This way of thinking about software systems is important to us.

For this reason, Cuis is a @emph{kernel} Smalltalk system which is still rather
close to Smalltalk-80. 
The @cuis{} goal is to be a small, coherent Smalltalk
development environment that, with study, is
comprehensible to a single person.

As we experiment with and evolve Cuis, this goal is carried out by removing everything
possible from the base system which is not essential, and by having a
composition strategy which allows one to write or add any features as 
needed.  As one gains understanding of the software kernel or core, one only
has to read and learn from each additional feature at a time to understand the whole.

Modern, open software environments are highly complex.
Cuis is an attempt to remain oriented and able to discover
patterns without being lost in a large wealth of possibilities
which one does not completely grasp.

It is said that one understands the world by building it.  Developing fluency and depth in
a new medium takes time and practice.

We invite you to become fluent and look forward to sharing with us what you have built.

First, however, we must start with some of the mechanics.

As the saying goes ``A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step''
@footnote{@url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_journey_of_a_thousand_miles_begins_with_a_single_step}}.

Let's step forward together.
@node Installing and configuring @cuis{}
@section Installing and configuring @cuis{}
@cuis{} is an environment and a programming language executed on an
idealized virtual computer. It is based on two major components:
the Smalltalk @dfn{virtual machine} conceptualizing this virtual
computer and an @dfn{image} representing the state of this computer.

The virtual machine is an executable program running on a dedicated
host (GNU/Linux, Mac OS X, Windows, etc.). It is called the @dfn{Open
Smalltalk Virtual Machine}, or Squeak @vm{} in short. There are
different flavors of @vm{}, for various combinations of Operating
System and CPU architecture. Therefore, one @vm{} compiled
for Windows on Intel architecture will not work in Linux on
ARM architecture. You need the specific @vm{} compiled for
the combination of Operating System and CPU architecture
your computer is based on.

The @emph{image} is a regular file feeding the @vm{} with all the objects
defining the state of the virtual computer. These objects are
classes, methods, instances of those classes as numbers, strings,
windows, debuggers -- whatever existed when the state of the virtual
computer was saved. An @dfn{image file} saved on a given Operating System
and CPU architecture @strong{will run identically on another system} 
requiring only a compatible @vm{} to be used.

The @vm{} allows an image to be restarted with windows in the same locations
between different operating systems and different CPU architectures
without recompilation.  This is what @dfn{portability} means to us.

What makes @cuis{} special is the living entities in the image: its
class population and arrangement, how the classes inherit from each
other. The class count is typically less than 600.

To get you started easily, we encourage you to install
@url{https://sites.google.com/view/cuis-university/descargas,,Cuis-University}@footnote{@url{https://sites.google.com/view/cuis-university/descargas}}. Here
you will find bundles for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and Windows on Intel
architecture. These bundles come with the dedicated @vm{} and a recent
image of @cuis{}; as well packages ready to be installed to make your
life easier when you experience the examples and exercises of the
book. By the time you read this book, @cuis{} will likely have evolved
to have a newer version.  What you learn here should, however, be
easily transferable.

To get @cuis{} running on your computer, extract the bundle and
execute the run script on Windows/Linux -- @file{run.bat} or
@file{run.sh} -- on OS X launch the Squeak application. Once you get
@cuis{} running, read the information displayed on the windows. When
you are done, you can close these windows and adjust @cuis{} to your
preferences.

The Cuis University distribution should work for most common platforms,
but there are always more platform variants than we can test for.
@strong{If you have a problem}, here are two sources of information.  If you
do @emph{not} have a problem, you can ignore these for now.
@itemize
@item Current installation instructions at the GitHub Cuis Repository:
@url{https://github.com/Cuis-Smalltalk/Cuis-Smalltalk-Dev#setting-up-cuis-in-your-machine}
@item Ask us on the Cuis email group
@url{https://lists.cuis.st/mailman/listinfo/cuis-dev}
@end itemize

@subsection Editing your preferences
Once you read the information on the default windows, the next thing
you want to do is to adjust visual properties to fit your preferences
and needs. To do so, access the World menu
...@clicksequence{Background click @click{} @label{Preferences...}}
then select the pin on the top right of the menu to make it
permanent. Here you have the most important options: the choice for
the @strong{font size}, the @strong{themes} whenever your prefer light
or dark colouring. There are other preferences you can explore by
yourself. Once you are done, do ...@clicksequence{World menu @click{}
@label{Save}}... to make your preferences permanent. In this book, we
keep the default @cuis{} theme, we suggest you to do the same so your
environment reflects the book screenshots.

@figure{Set Preferences,ch01-Preferences,12}

@subsection Fun with window placement
@cindex tools @subentry workspace
The first tool to discover is the @dfn{Workspace} tool. It is a kind
of text editor to key in Smalltalk code you can execute
immediately. Do ...@clicksequence{World menu @click{}
@label{Open...} @click{} @label{Workspace}}...

Now we ask @cuis{} to make the window's placement: click the blue icon
(top left) to access the window option and experiment with the white
area to place the Workspace window at the half left of the @cuis{}
environment.

@figure{Window options,ch01-img1a,7}

The @label{resize...} option even offers more freedom to place the
window. Try the following exercise:

@exercise{Middle placement,exePlacement, @emph{Use the
@label{resize...} option to place the Workspace centered on @cuis{}
environment.}}

@node Writing your first scripts
@section Writing your first scripts
In this section you will learn how to write simple scripts in the
Workspace to get a taste and feeling about Smalltalk code. The
examples are associated with small exercises to experiment with and
accompanied with solutions in the annex. We intentionally keep the
details of the syntax out of this section.

In a Workspace, the usual @emph{Hello World!} program can be written
in Smalltalk:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{The traditional 'Hello World!' program,hello,
Transcript show: 'Hello World!'}

@cindex tools @subentry transcript
To execute this code, select it with the mouse and over it do
...@clicksequence{right mouse click @click{} @label{Do it (d)}}...
You may now see nothing happen! Indeed to see the output, you need a
@dfn{Transcript} window to be visible.  The @class{Transcript} is a
place where programmer can send information for the user as we are
doing here. Do ...@clicksequence{World menu @click{} @label{Open...}
@click{} @label{Transcript}}... and execute the code again.

@figure{Transcript window with output,ch01-img2,3}

The workspace code comes in three parts:

@itemize

@item the string literal @smalltalk{'Hello World!'}  

@item the message @msg{show:} with its argument @smalltalk{'Hello World!'}

@item the class @class{Transcript} receiving the message @msg{show:} with its argument

@end itemize

@cindex shortcut @seeentry{keyboard shortcut}
@cindex keyboard shortcut @subentry select all code (@kbd{Ctrl-a})
@cindex keyboard shortcut @subentry executing code (@kbd{Ctrl-d})
The action of printing takes place in the class
@class{Transcript}. The code execution is also invoked with keyboard
shortcuts @kbd{Ctrl-a} (@emph{select @b{A}ll}) then @kbd{Ctrl-d}
(@emph{@b{D}o it}).

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Multiple lines, hello2,
Transcript show: 'Hello World!'.
Transcript newLine.
Transcript show: 'I am Cuising'}

In this three lines script, observe how the lines are separated by a
dot ``.''. This period is a line separator so it is not needed in the
third line nor in a one line script. The message @msg{newLine} has no
argument.

@cindex string
A @dfn{String} is the way text is represented in a programming
language, it is a collection of characters. We already met string with
our first script, it is enclosed in single quotes: @smalltalk{'hello
world!'}. We capitalize it with the @msg{capitalized} message:

@cindex string @subentry @method{capitalized}
@smalltalkExample{Transcript show: 'hello world!' capitalized
@result{} 'Hello world!' }

@cindex string @subentry @method{asUppercase}
To convert all the characters in capital use the @msg{asUppercase} message:

@smalltalkExample{Transcript show: 'hello world!' asUppercase
@result{} 'HELLO WORLD!'}

@cindex string @subentry concatenate
Two strings are concatenated with the @msg{,} message:

@smalltalkExampleCaption{Concatenate strings, concatenateStrings,
Transcript show: 'Hello '@comma{} 'my beloved '@comma{} 'friend'
@result{} 'Hello my beloved friend'}

@exercise{Concatenate and uppercase, concatenateUppercase,
@emph{Add a message to modify @ref{concatenateStrings} to output
'Hello MY BELOVED friends'.}}

@subsection Fun with numbers
@cindex number @subentry integer
@cindex interger @seeentry{number}
@cindex keyboard shortcut @subentry execute and print result (@kbd{Ctrl-p})

In your Workspace, to compute a factorial execute the example below
with @kbd{Ctrl-a} then @kbd{Ctrl-p} (@emph{@b{P}rint it}):
@smalltalkExample{100 factorial
@result{}  9332621544394415268169923885626670049071596826438162146859
29638952175999932299156089414639761565182862536979208272237582
51185210916864000000000000000000000000}

@cuis{} handles very large integer numbers without requiring a
special type declaration or method. To convince yourelf try the example below:
@smalltalkExample{10000 factorial / 9999 factorial
@result{} 10000}

If you execute and print with @kbd{Ctrl-p} the code: @smalltalk{10000
factorial}, you realize it takes far more time to print one factorial result 
than to compute two factorials and divide them. The result is an integer
as expected, not a scaled decimal number as many computer languages
will return.

@cindex number @subentry rational fraction
@cindex rational fraction @seeentry{number}
@cindex fraction @seeentry{number}

As we are discussing division, you may not get the result you expect:
@smalltalkExample{15 / 4
@result{} 15/4}

It looks like @cuis{} is lazy because it does not answer the decimal
number @smalltalk{3.75} as we were expecting. In fact @cuis{} wants to
be as accurate as possible, and its answer is a rational fraction! After
all, fractions are just division we are too lazy -- because it
is troublesome -- to compute, @cuis{} does just that!

Try out this to understand what is happening underneath:
@smalltalkExample{(15 / 4) + (1 / 4)
@result{} 4}

Is it not wonderful? @cuis{} computes with rational numbers. We
started with division and addition operations on integer, and we got
an accurate result thanks to intermediate computation on rational
numbers.

@cuisNote{In the example, observe how the parentheses are used
although in arithmetic calculation the division is performed first. With
@cuis{} you need to specify the order of operations with
parentheses. We will explain why later.}

@exercise{Inverse sum,inverseSum, @emph{Write the code to compute the
sum of the first four integer inverses. 4 inverted is 1/4}}

Integers can be printed in different forms with the appropriate
message:

@cindex number @subentry integer @subentry roman
@cindex number @subentry integer @subentry as words
@cindex number @subentry integer @subentry base
@smalltalkExample{2020 printStringRoman @result{} 'MMXX' 
2020 printStringWords  @result{} 'two thousand, twenty'
"Number as the Maya did"
2020 printStringBase: 20 @result{} '510'}

@exercise{Capitalize number as words,capWordNumber,@emph{Print 2020 as
words capitalized.}}


@cindex number @subentry literal
@cindex literal @subentry number
The integer and float numbers we have played with are @dfn{Numeric
Literals}. Literals are building blocks of the language and considered as
constant expressions.  They literally are as they appear.

There are several syntax variants which denote a number:

@multitable @columnfractions .45 .55
@headitem Numeric literal                    @tab What it represents
   @item @smalltalk{1}                       @tab integer (decimal notation)
   @item @smalltalk{2r101}                   @tab integer (binary radix)
   @item @smalltalk{16rFF}                   @tab integer (hexadecimal radix)
   @item @smalltalk{1.5}                     @tab floating point number
   @item @smalltalk{2.4e7}                   @tab floating point (exponential notation)
@end multitable

Depending on the value we need to use, we can mix these literal
representations:

@smalltalkExample{16rA + 1 + 5e-1 + 6e-2
@result{} 289/25}

@node Spacewar!
@section Spacewar!
The Spacewar! game was initially developed in 1962 by Steve Russell on
a DEC PDP-1 minicomputer. It is said to be the first known video game
installed on several computers and it was very popular in the
programming community in the 1960s. It was ported and rewritten
several times to different hardware architectures and complemented with
additional features. @emph{Computer Space}, the first arcade video
game cabinet was a clone of Spacewar!

@figure{Spacewar! game on DEC PDP-1 minicomputer,ch01-SpacewarPDP,7}

Wikipedia describes very precisely this space combat simulation game:

@quotation
The gameplay of Spacewar! involves two monochrome spaceships called
"the needle" and "the wedge", each controlled by a player, attempting
to shoot one another while maneuvering on a two-dimensional plane in
the gravity well of a star, set against the backdrop of a
starfield. The ships fire torpedoes, which are not affected by
the gravitational pull of the star. The ships have a limited number of
torpedoes and supply of fuel, which is used when the player fires the
ship's thrusters. Torpedoes are fired one at a time by flipping a
toggle switch on the computer or pressing a button on the control pad,
and there is a cooldown period between launches. The ships remain in
motion even when the player is not accelerating, and rotating the
ships does not change the direction of their motion, though the ships
can rotate at a constant rate without inertia.

Each player controls one of the ships and must attempt to shoot down
the other ship while avoiding a collision with the star or the
opposing ship. Flying near the star can provide a gravity assist to
the player at the risk of misjudging the trajectory and falling into
the star. If a ship moves past one edge of the screen, it reappears on
the other side in a wraparound effect.
@author Wikipedia, @url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spacewar!#Gameplay,Spacewar!,Spacewar!}
@end quotation

Therefore, the protagonists of the game are:

@enumerate
 @item a @strong{central star} generating a gravity field,

 @item a @strong{star field} background,

 @item two @strong{space ships} called @emph{the needle} and @emph{the
 wedge} controlled by two players.

 @item @strong{torpedoes} fired by the space ships.

@end enumerate

@figure{Spacewar! game play,ch01-SpacewarGameplay,5}


